um I'm really thrilled to introduce our
next speaker uh Cheyenne Concepcion
Cheyenne is a multi-disciplinary artist
and designer based in San Francisco she
creates work that examines the politics
of place using installation social
practice sculpture and textile drawing
on her interest in research and urban
planning and utilizing her training as a
designer concepcion's work is a site is
site-specific and is censored on a cult
centered on cultural memory place-based
activism migration and often has a
public component she is the co-founder
and artistic director of the new
monument task force a Fantastical
Municipal agency engaged in the dialogue
development and design of new monuments
in California
over to you Cheyenne
hi everyone my name is Cheyenne
Concepcion I am an artist and designer
between New York and San Francisco
my work uncovers the politics of place
through installation social practice
textile and I'm the artistic director of
new monuments task force a Fantastical
Municipal agency
engaged in the dialogue design and
development of new monuments in
California
my talk today is titled the artist in
the city and it explores recent
ruminations of mine and
what I'm learning about my role as an
artist in the city and I hope you like
it
so I will share my screen
okay
so The Story Goes Like This it's
February of 2020 and I'm beginning to
plan an art installation for a
transnational group exhibition titled
shaping the past
it's an initiative by Monument lab in
the Gertz Institute addressing what whom
and how we remember in public spaces
it was supposed to feature artists from
around the world myself included mostly
public artists working in collaborative
ways
and so I was planning to Showcase my
project Borderlands archive which is an
independent archive I started in 2018.
the project traces connection across
territorial divide it's an exploration
of place of cultural memory of a
misunderstood landscape between two
countries
um we kind of show our work as an
exhibition like the one we had here in
New York and also as a web platform
where we showcase artifacts that we've
collected from books photographs donated
objects
news maps and hopefully it will kind of
serve as a resource in the future
um when we look back at this place
and so everything was going well
in February of 2020 until it quickly
wasn't
and so
oops sorry I don't know why this is
there
and so in February 20 of 2020 and
everything changed especially in
California everything kind of stopped
and as artists all of us were working in
public spaces and when the idea of
gathering in collaborative ways and
being in public space at all came off
the table our projects halted and we
kind of regrouped and stayed safe
um but by July of 2020 we picked our
project back up again but but by July
2020 everything had changed the world
had changed America had changed and I
had changed because of it
following the murder of George Floyd
there was an ongoing passionate National
conversation about race and
representation in the US there was a
deep frustration about countless
injustices of how America treats black
and brown bodies
at this time the national conversation
became a local one all over the city
monuments were being reckoned with and
on Juneteenth in Golden Gate Park
protesters toppled numerous monuments in
the music Concourse
and there were several vandalized across
the city
Francis
shown here
meanwhile that same weekend SF officials
were removing monuments in the middle of
the night this is Christopher Columbus
at quit Tower
and at the same time a political debacle
around the doctor Maya Angelou Monument
was evolving right before my eyes
initially accepted then rejected in 2019
Berkeley artists lava Thomas's proposal
for the Dr Maya Angelou Monument was
quickly scrapped due to its design
in short it wasn't traditional enough
in a 2019 statement by supervisor
Catherine Stephanie who sponsored the
public art legislation claimed that the
monument design didn't Elevate Maya in
the same way that men had been elevated
across history
was talking about the non-figurative
form of the sculpture she was talking
about the need for more pedestals and
more bronze
following all this in a 20 a July 2020
public meeting that I attended the sfac
muted the end of lava Thomas's speech
addressing the controversy
inadvertently muting her
and this caused national and local
outrage
uh collectives like this see black women
cropped up to stand in solidarity with
lava and rightfully so
and finally
mayor London breed in mid-july of 2020
ordered the SF Arts commission to create
a committee and Municipal study to
elevate evaluate the city's 94 public
monuments and memorials and their
intersection with our country's racist
history
and so it was definitely a moment in San
Francisco at the time and I think it was
this weekend
where I was you know working as a public
artist in this space thinking about how
we are represented in public art
thinking about how I I create public art
and also
being kind of an active member of my
citizen a member of my city excuse me I
decided that I would co-opt the city's
Municipal study and and
respective advisory committee
and so new monuments task force starts
here
the project emerged out of the idea to
co-opt the city's Municipal process but
do it better do it in a way that serves
us
they had fumbled so hard until now how
could they possibly get it right at this
point
also the national context kind of puked
into my mind if not now then when
why not now
and another question why not me why not
a brown woman who was first generational
never had seen a monument that
represented anything like her upbringing
or looked anything like her
and why not me a rogue Urban designer
turned public artist
even with all these questions I knew
where I needed to start
I wanted to Revel in the idea of being
an outsider
what can't the city touch I thought what
can't they take space over I thought
that's exactly where I wanted to start I
wanted to take control of that space the
space outside the institution to create
a participatory Larger than Life work
about our institutional structures and
how they've manifested in our public art
public art offices are really really
good at collecting data
but I think what artists can do is
create timely points for critical
inquiry they can create
moments of intense reflection they can
create public awareness
I thought if monuments are so top down
can this project be bottom up
could I create a project that shifts the
power dynamics in the city in some way
could I create change
and for me as an artist that is the most
exciting question
understanding our agency as artists is
something that I am developing day by
day
but I often call back on this quote by
one of my mentors Stephanie siuko
and I highlight the last part because I
think it's so Central to this project
what should the questions be
I think at the time when I was
developing the project the city was
also developing their their project they
were talking about monetary figures of
The Monuments studying the maintenance
plans who gets to take care of them
whose responsibility is it people were
also asking questions about who was the
worst figure who was the most racist
Colonial Monument of all and it was
almost like a where's Waldo for
monuments in a way and to me when I was
observing this I kind of was thinking
that no one was asking the right
questions
and no one was asking questions like
what are the narratives being
communicated as a whole through these
art objects
what is our relationship to monuments
what is our relationship to public art
can these objects engage us to think
critically
to see ourselves can they engage us to
see the truth
and so while developing these questions
associated with this work I was building
a Brain Trust of artists curators
non-profit cultural leaders and
activists
I like to think of us as Outsiders a
Motley Crew Maybe
um I think that public art needs eyes
it's a collective process after all
and I needed an advisory committee I
needed to create a task force
so I recruited fellow artists curators
mentors and even cold called Bay Area
cultural workers who I knew was doing
the work such as Xavier Buck from the
Huey P Newton foundation and I asked
them to join our efforts
who hadn't been at the table I thought
if that's you you can sit with us you
can work with us and I felt like there
was a lot of power in that
so I led the three-part unofficial
Municipal study and I titled it The
Relic report
it was supposed to be in three parts so
what I'm showing you here is Relic
report volume one
and it was designed to introduce the
project and the main questions and also
present a public comment survey with
which I was going to pull
um SF residents about with excuse me
so I drew from my background in Urban
Design and Landscape architecture and
employed the typology study as the main
methodology for assessment
I used categories and groupings to weigh
The Collection as a whole
who were the most celebrated individuals
why what was their gender diversity what
was their racial diversity what were the
different design Styles what were the
different materials used where did they
come from
so we came up with six different
categories and I'll go through them the
first one here is the boys club and so
you can see the the gender diversity of
the monument collection in San Francisco
with 53 men and three women
um there was other factors like there
was actually a lot of women
representation in the collective in the
collection such as women representing
men like Angels or Lady Liberty
um so that was kind of interesting but
only three women represented real women
there were the ogs which were 15
monuments commemorating prominent men of
colonial expeditions
there was modernish which was inspired
by the recent call in in San Francisco
for more traditional monuments so I
wanted to look at the non-traditional
ones where did they come from what did
they celebrate
there was War and Peace it turns out
there's 10 celebrating more and two
celebrating peace
there's artists and idealists which were
often gifts from other countries and
many of them litter Golden Gate Park
and there was what remains which were
monuments that were hard to place often
bureaucrats or city or state you know
figures
they were also weirdly located monuments
hard to find somewhat forgotten and I
thought that that brought up some kind
of idea about what our relationship to
monuments as a whole are do we notice
them when we walk by and have they moved
us in any way and
um to me that feels like a missed
opportunity
and so after we released volume one we
commenced a public comment period we
like this project was supposed to co-opt
um Municipal process and processes and
use it for us and so that's what we did
and we we published a public comment
survey which was available online and
through a mailer campaign and the survey
asked seven qualitative questions
um I wanted to start where the sfac
couldn't start so I wanted to focus on
things that were harder to answer things
that were subjective things about
personal
um views and so
we had around a hundred respondents to
our survey
over 30 days and
um that all got compiled into a second
volume of Relic report which highlighted
amazing feedback by San Francisco
citizens about what they want to see in
the monuments of the future what has
hurt you in the past what do you think a
monument is how can we improve our
definition of monuments and so we had
the most beautiful responses people
spent a lot of time sending in really
thoughtful responses and so we tried to
Showcase this Collective process through
our second edition
which we show here and so it's organized
by the seven different survey questions
and we kind of summarize with
our recommendations as a task force so
the task force met three separate times
to kind of go over the tons of
um Community input and kind of curate
what were the most important messages
that we wanted to see in the booklet
and most importantly we also created six
recommendations for new monuments
because this was an unofficial City
study remember so we needed to come up
with a recommendations as City studies
do and so I'm going to read them out
loud because in talks like this I'd like
to read them out loud because I think
it's part of the ritual of what we went
through over six months together
and so it goes like this
um number one new monuments must expand
public knowledge number two new
monuments must not be on the side of
Oppression
number three new monuments must disrupt
idea old ideas of what monuments can be
number four
new monuments must be dynamic and
ever-changing number five new monuments
must tell stories on a community level
and number six new monuments must
challenge observers to stop and think
twice
and so Relic report has become our
guiding document it lights the way
forward for new monument task forces
future initiatives
um
and
even today I still look back on the book
every month or so when I'm working on
projects because it has so much amazing
content in it
and on that note I wanted to talk about
some of the initiatives that we've had
in 2021 mostly since publishing The
Relic report
so here we were able to project our six
demands on the side of ybca in downtown
SF
um as part of the SF Urban film festival
for a couple months every night and so
that was pretty cool taking up public
space
um our another initiative we did was a
workshop called marble and media lab in
which we partnered with zero one art and
technology and New Media artist Camila
mcgrade
and so this was a really fun project
where we wanted to create a workshop and
cite it at a really important place I
discussed this earlier in my my talk
which was the music Concourse and a lot
had happened there in Juneteenth of 2020
so
being
um
what new monuments task force is which
is kind of this Renegade public art
agency I wanted to take up space in a
very obvious way and kind of cite this
workshop at this site of protest and
reckon with The Monuments or toppled
monuments using augmented reality there
and so we
um with the help of Camilla who is kind
of an AR expert we found eight emerging
artists from the Bay Area and supported
their projects and had them
kind of choose a monument to create a
project around we we created workshops
with different skill building tools and
then ultimately did uh Guerrilla public
art walking tour at the end and so I'm
just going to show some projects this is
one of the artists Caleb Lightfoot and
he he did Francis Scott Key and so he
kind of went into the different stages
of history that this Monument had
experienced I think 2020 was the second
one with the BLM protests and then he
imagined that the next one would be it's
ruin and following its ruin would be
this kind of historical analysis of what
happened there what that was and the
fragments of the flag and the fragments
of the monument kind of become hyper
analyzed in an archaeological plate and
then finally he reconstructs this scene
in augmented reality with the with the
rubble and he ultimately projected it at
the site so this is kind of just an
example of one of the projects that we
had here's a map of the different
projects
um as a whole
and I'm going to share two videos with
you
this is how to Scott I think she's a she
works at gray area so hello welcome to
Future Society access Department of
historical
contextualization we are committed to a
radically new understanding of history
that enages the complexity of our past
rather than a Serge in a single
narrative act that bends toward progress
religious attempt to collapse the past
into a single story to cast
kaleidoscopic oops actually I wasn't
supposed to do that I was just supposed
to show you the next one which is May
Ross's work an indigenous artist who
wanted to showcase the landscape before
it was found by a monument that honors
three men
Navigators
and finally our most recent initiative
is called in the future and it's a
digital Zine where we're curating and
spotlighting artists who are creating
public art that are reimagining new ways
of taking up space in the public and so
we put out an international call and
we're currently building a website and
web platform for which to view this work
and we felt like we needed to do this
because all of our projects in the past
focused on the past I think 2020 was
that five we were Reckoning with
everything we've inherited inherited
until now
and this project we were brainstorming
about and we're like we should we should
start thinking about the future now and
it feels fresh and I'm excited about it
and it should be
um readily to view in two months
and so I'm going to finish this talk to
finish up why I'm here and the things
I've been trying to explain through this
talk and
um through my thought process is so what
is the role of the artists in the city
and I can tell you that through
monuments task force I've learned that
my role as an artist in the city
is very crucial
at a time of Reckoning and reflection
artists have the skills to create a
conversation about trauma and repair
artists also have the potential to
negotiate ethics
which create more just environments
which create more just cities
and so four things I want you guys to
come away with today are four things I
think artists can do
artists can create awareness
like the gorilla girls feminist poster
series
artists can piece together fragmentary
evidence like forensic architectures
tactical based research approach
um and their amazing projects shown here
triple chaser
artists can create collaborative action
like decolonize this place and their
poster series about how to take a
monument down
and artists can ask the right questions
like we did in San Francisco
I think these four things together can
create power
and if we can create power we can create
change
foreign that's all I have but thank you
for having me welcome back everybody
um I'm so excited to be here live with
Cheyenne
um what an amazing Community Practice
that the new monuments task works is I
mean it was so cool to see the way that
you brought people together around this
common goal of making positive impact in
our public spaces
um you know and there was one part of
your presentation you know and when you
were reading out the
um
oh gosh what would you I don't want to
say man
the recommendations I wanted to say
Manifesto but I was like maybe that's
like a little too political or something
but um the um you know the
recommendations like new monuments
should always be dynamic like that was a
point that I felt was particularly
cogent
um and interesting because the concept
of a monument is so static like the
whole point of it being like it's it's
almost like it's ontology is rooted in
it's permanence or perceived permanence
so I would love to talk a little bit
more about that dynamism and you know
how that would manifest itself across
any kind of new new monument yeah
um
so I I love that recommendation and I
think it kind of what you what you're
talking about is how we've traditionally
kind of conceived monuments and what we
think of them as I mean they've been
around forever so it's something that's
almost ingrained in us but I think we're
kind of in a time where we're re we're
it's kind of up for grabs to redefine it
and I've kind of get that question a lot
um
monuments are you know static objects
they're they're
um usually to kind of commemorate men
and
um National victories or things like
that and
um I think we're kind of entering a time
where we're rejecting that definition
and we definitely did that two years ago
uh or I guess it's only been here
actually in 2020 and now I feel like
it's kind of an exciting time because
people are wanting to know what's next
and I feel like this idea of having a
dynamic Monument
is
um
is a really good place to start and I
think the person that submitted
a lot of our recommendations were based
off of Citizen input and so the person
that kind of commented
on um dynamism was really kind of
pushing this idea of also including
technology and kind of um a
multi-sensory kind of an experience of a
monument because that's kind of where
they've failed until now right so why
wouldn't you start at the place of
the breaking point I guess and so
let's unpack it
no totally I mean it's and I mean
augmented reality feels like a medium
that
avails itself to that really nicely in
the sense that you can have some kind of
marker that's visible
um in in physical reality that perhaps
you know is something that is
purely abstract you know that doesn't
have any kind of you know moral ethical
con you know connotation to it and as
you know values change we can update in
augmented reality what that
manifestation of that might be I mean
that's just one kind of way that I could
imagine this this working you know as we
saw that uh the sculpture with the sound
playing
um and you know I could easily see that
becoming a different shape to match the
needs of a certain time
um or the words the the words that are
spoken as part of the audio part of it
um it could be altered to be more
inclusive and add to you know more add
more voices to you know what that
Monument stands for
um and so I mean it's just it just seems
so ripe with possibility and I I love
that idea of breaking away from the
staticness of this idea of permanence
because truly you know I think
permanence in itself is kind of a kind
of a fallacy um you know I don't think
anything is totally forever and we have
to be adaptable to those kinds of those
kinds of change and that's also
something that welding protocol is
really rooted in is like we can't think
of the world as this one fixed thing we
have to continue to reassess and
reevaluate all of the interdependencies
that we have here yeah
I have a couple of questions from the
audience that um have just come in
um Hannah's here actually uh who we were
just speaking about
um
uh I would love to hear more from
Cheyenne about how an if she approaches
the Fantastical satirical
um task force as a form of World
building
ah I love
the project because it's this amazing
little vehicle to kind of talk about a
lot of things I often feel like I take
on big projects like that where I'm like
driving this big bus but it feels much
bigger than me but that satirical voice
that um
it kind of punk rock like when I was
thinking about the project and I don't
view myself as Punk but I feel like that
project is definitely it is definitely
Punk and I tried to like get that out of
it with the project voice
um but I think the satirical the
playfulness
at the end of the day I think it is kind
of cheeky and snarky and funny but I I
am talking about serious things
um you know there's there's a lot of
pain that's been kind of
um
felt by these our art objects it's it's
a public work so you you there are more
expectations of public art to kind of
serve Community to kind of serve Like A
Narrative of the city kind of um you
know
um so they they do have jobs like I feel
like monuments do have jobs and
um as public objects they should
serve community and so I am talking
about serious things with a kind of like
cheeky approach to it and I feel like
that helps deliver the point in a in a
better way when the project started I it
started out of this idea to co-opt a
city agency
and I wanted to do everything like they
couldn't do which was have a voice have
um do things quickly have agency there
my voice is very strong in and snarky in
that book in The Relic report and
um I encourage
like for example the workshop we did I
was I was encouraging people in the
workshop to also use your your voice and
your perspective and
loudly and um so it's something that
I use to disguise something very serious
and something that's kind of hard to
talk about and complex and there's a lot
of different opinions and I feel like
that playfulness and the it's part of
the art of it you know is to kind of
subvert the message and make you think
like
if I came to you on the street and it's
like let's talk about monuments I'd
ought to like you know someone would put
their hand in my face or like walk away
immediately but
um part of the delivery is important
because it opens up it's like the entry
point for the idea right and so
and the idea is a messy idea like
monuments are extremely messy
um political objects and so how it's not
easy to talk about and I feel like the
playfulness and the punk rockness
attitude it serves that in a way
absolutely I was just talking the other
day about you know we were talking about
virtual reality and I was you know I was
talking to my friend Tina and
um we were saying that you know in after
covet and like kind of all of the
different like webgl and metaverse
projects and augmented reality projects
that have been popping up everywhere you
know we were talking about a return to
the VR headset because it's kind of like
a kitsch
this object at this point you know it's
a it's such a funny experience that like
is still like the best kind of thing
that we have in in certain regards
um and the thing that to me about that
particular medium that I find and
augmented reality as well is that it's
so absurd you know it's like the
absurdity of it like make like makes it
more immersive it makes the world feel
more real it gives you this kind of like
different kind of and honestly more
intimate because when you're laughing at
something and when something is kind of
peaking your interest in that way you
you kind of come closer to it
um and it really it feels more more
intimate
um the bodily experience you know
because you're kind of
outside of the work this world this
couch that I'm sitting in at like
immediately you know versus looking at
something on your phone and still being
rooted in this space I feel like it's
it's kind of a transition
um
yeah using that you didn't use those we
used phones for our um
Workshop phones and tablets well
something else about you know and this
is some I asked a couple other guests
this question and you know I have some I
have my own interesting ideas about this
question but I'd love to pose this to
you in the context of the of the new
monuments project
um you know augmented reality is a
really fascinating medium because in a
lot of ways it exemplifies what
it exemplifies the capability of
simulation to do anything but at the
same time when you create an image on
your phone you can't touch it you know
like you can you know you can make a
filter that turns all of the grass into
lava but when you touch the grass you're
not going to get burned kind of thing
um and so to me there's this really
interesting like Duality or tension
there
um not even Duality I hate to speak in a
binary but you know there's this tension
that's existing there between the
possible and the impossible
um and I'm wondering you know
how you how and I mean how do you think
through that that tension between
something that you know is on your phone
and kind of feels impermanent versus the
you know unless they go back to
permanence I mean we but
um do you know what I'm saying yeah
um
I when you're talking something that
came to mind I don't know if this is
necessarily related to our experience
but with the marbling media project but
it it
you kind of made me want to
think about taking augmented reality to
a Next Step by involving your body like
the experience isn't just visual like
what if you can kind of
um cause say okay now touch the monument
or something you know and then and then
it becomes like more performative I
think in some way and
um it made me think about if we want to
restage the marble and media project and
do it in a more controlled environment
maybe more of a gallery space
um because it's something that was hard
actually if you want to talk about
augmented reality it was actually
something hard to pull off in a public
environment because there was so much
other
things going on I don't know if you've
been to the music Concourse but it's I
think even during the pandemic it got
even crazier but there's just hundreds
of people walking and it's hard to um
to get get your phone to kind of
recognize it with all the movement and
so I feel like this in the next step of
well from what we learned and if we if
we would do it in a public place I'd say
um what to kind of almost embrace the
movement I don't know how to do that I'm
just like thinking about ideas of what
how augmented reality could be improved
at least with the idea you know what I
mean that's that's the first step is we
have to imagine what could be in order
to make it so
um and I think that that this is sort of
connected to another audience question
that we have this comes from Auto Art
machine and they asked Cheyenne I'm
curious about what you think of physical
and AR transformations of monuments
versus total removal like and to me that
kind of reads is like is it possible to
undo the harm of the physical Monument
causes through a purely virtual
uh transformation
um a big task I don't know if any
intervention could like um totally
remedy that but I do think I love this
idea of layering and I think that it
should be yes augmented reality like
looking at Hannah's project and the
things we were doing and then the music
Concourse there is this idea of layering
of history that is kind of inherently
involved with ar so I love that and I
think that the layers could also be
physical I think that people should stop
taking care of The Monuments there's
someone employed by the city running
around scraping bird poop off of all of
The Monuments I feel like there there
should be a layer of age a layer of
disrepair because these are old ideas
if if someone splashes red paint on it
out of you know protest I would I like
this idea of leaving it there or letting
it age and kind of into a ruin and then
I think that
we wouldn't not learn the lesson that
way and I'm actually
um not an advocate for removing them I
think that they should stay in place and
there should be creative actions around
them or they they could be moved to
another location and contextualized
differently but I I love this idea of
layering and I think that AR does it
really well and then there's this also
idea of us you know right now in 2021
we're Reckoning with these ideas but
someone's gonna
there's going to be
another
voice not heard there's going to be
um kind of
wave of thinkers in 20 years and so we
should continue to layer on this like
this um object I I think that AR is is
kind of something that is a really easy
alternative to to work with now and
something I want to keep doing and I
know other public art offices are
thinking about too
absolutely
um
thinking about public art offices we
have a question from Barry um who asked
and this is a great question because I'm
curious too what was this what is the
city's response been if at all to to
this project
so we have been in contact with them
from the beginning because of our
connections with the Gerta Institute and
so they've listened and we've had
private conversations and
um we even they they still haven't
published their reports so they're still
working on that and they've just
assembled a
um task force one of our task force
members is on their task force so we'll
find out more but they haven't met yet
so it's slowly coming along I think that
they had a really big push for more
public input and I don't want to take
full credit for that but I think that
our kind of push to have more of a
public facing project really did
um
did uh
affect that affect their process I
really do think it did because when we
when we were first discussing it it
wasn't
it wasn't or when we were when they
first kind of came out and said that
they were going to take on a project
like that it was never kind of discussed
and now it seems like that it's a center
point of their strategy so that makes me
feel like we kind of did our job I also
know because of they were looking for a
consultant and we were kind of
entertaining that idea so I know that
they they do know we also carry
knowledge so I think that I wish them
the best and they haven't
we'll see what they publish in a year or
two
and we'll we'll continue to do our work
and leading the way and I think a lot of
our
um
projects are speculative but they have
solutions to them like we are we are
making good suggestions and yeah we do
kind of we had an origin of trolling
them like lovingly trolling them in a
little way but I I think that we want
the same outcome we want
um
we want more representation and form and
allegory of monuments
we want more artists of color making
them we want more funding for new ideas
we want more Dynamic monuments
as we said
amazing well I mean those I'm going to
leave it with those with those requests
because I I hope that people can you
know listen to them really internalize
them and think about strategies that we
can all work together to to meet them
because it's so clear that our public
spaces need to change and the morals and
the values that were uh that were in
popular favor are no longer and I love
that idea of leaving a monument to rot
because if an idea is really still true
and still relevant to a society that
Society will build a new monument you
know you know it's it's gonna you know
if that's still relevant then it will it
will continue to be but if it's not we
can let it we can let that be a thing of
the past I know exactly nice way to
leave it out
thank you so much for being here
Cheyenne it was so wonderful to have you
thanks good luck today
thanks so much bye